We will be talking about three
very related CSS topics today,
inheritance, specificity and the cascade.
And I am gonna rip off will sentences
title he does JavaScript the hard parts.
We would consider this to
be CSS the hard parts,
these are concepts that you encounter
every single time that you work with CSS.
But you've probably never
studied them in detail,
you've never had anyone
explain them in detail and
this is where a lot of the confusion
comes from when working with CSS.
So let's take a quick overview of
what all of the three parts are and
then we're going to go into talking
about inheritance in detail.
So the big C and CSS it's right in
the name is off is the cascade and
it encompasses all three of
these particular concepts.
The Cascade will govern
exactly how inheritance and
specificity factor into what's
happening in the cascade.
But which is why becomes the C and
CSS, but
all three of these are worth
studying in depth.
So first of all we have inheritance.
Inheritance says that styling
is applying to an element,
is going to apply to
all of its descendants.
So if we say for example the body is
gonna have a font family of Ariel all of
the descendants of the body and there
are basically all of them are going to
have that same font family
in that particular case.
We're gonna look at that
in detail In a moment.
Specificity has to do with the relevance
of a given style to a selected
portion of the page.
We need to take a look at all of the
styles we've written, we need to figure
out which one of those is going to quote
win, specificity is a part of that step.
And then finally we have
the cascade which is,
given that we have styles coming from
our user agent, the browser style sheet.
From the user sometimes people write their
own style sheets because perhaps because
of visual issues, they might prefer to
have say a black background with white
writing on every site that they visit
the user can write their own style sheet.
And then we have the style
sheets that we write,
those are called author style sheets.
The author style sheets may be coming
from the external style sheet,
the separate style sheet
that we normally write.
They may be coming from the head of
the document called an embedded or
an internal style sheet, or
they may be coming from an inline source.
The other thing we'll factor in here
is the importance of those styles,
most styles are normal.
And then of course we have our old friend
being important which we'll find out
should be used very very
sparingly way more sparingly
than a lot of us are using it
in web development these days.
So that is the arc of what
we're going to be covering.
Let's get started then with Inheritance.
Inheritance is exactly
what it sounds like.
If you think about the people who
come up to you on the street and
say you have your grandmother's smile.
It is exactly the same kind
of thing here in inheritance.
There are certain types of CSS properties,
that are passed on to their
descendants and there are predictable
as to which ones of these there are.
So, I'll give you some hints for
how to take a look at that.
If you're a programmer,
a way to think about this is as follows.
So, here I have a tiny little bit of HTML.
We're just going to have an h 1 and
a paragraph.
And over here I say that the body
color is going to be red.
What is going to be red?
If we were to drop this into code pen and
look at it, the h 1 and
the P would both be red Because
they are descendants of the body.
If I add F to this a paragraph and
say that the color is blue and
we were to take a look at this,
our h 1 would still be red
it's still inheriting that
red color from the body.
But the paragraph would be blue because,
we have a more targeted style that
is going to get to the paragraph
specifically in other words that
paragraph is overriding that body.
Some of that is cascade ordering you may
think, because the paragraph comes later.
But if we were to actually rearrange these
and put the paragraph style first and
the body style second,
the paragraph would still be blue.
And I'm gonna demonstrate a little
bit more of that in just a moment.
Another way to think about this for
those of you who do a lot of programming,
is to think about global styling and
local styling.
We don't really have these
concepts of global and
local inside of CSS the way you
do in many programming languages.
But if you think about the body is
where we can set global styling,
generally speaking, this is where we're
gonna put the styling for our Document.
And then later we'll override
it on a case by case basis,
that you could think of
that as your local styling.
Let's talk about what types of
properties yo're gonna inherit and
what don't inherit.
Fortunately it's not really
all that hard to remember,
basically the things that
inherit have to do with fonts.
So, all of the font properties
like font family or font style or
color all of those inherit.
The lists inherit as we
have seen previously.
The types of markers that are there
can be inherited by the children.
We have text that can be inherited,
like text transform,
which take makes your letters
go from lowercase to uppercase.
For example, Text alignment left right,
Text Indent indenting things.
We have the space properties,
whether it is letter space,
line, space, word space, line height,
all of those are inherited.
And then finally,
there's a couple of odd ones,
we'll take a look at visibility
in detail a little bit later.
Widows and orphans, often used in print
styling, where we want to be sure that we
don't have one word hanging out on a line
by itself, that's widows and orphans.
And border-collapse,
which is using tables,
where we can collapse
the border between the cells so
we don't have a little bit of gap in
between all of the cells in our table.
The things that don't inherit,
basically have to do with the box model.
So, margins, padding, borders,
none of those inherit.
The display property doesn't inherit.
So, if you think about that,
that does not inherit.
Positioning so absolute relative fixed,
positioning all that does not inherit.
Floats do not inherit,
backgrounds, background colors,
background images,
those do not inherit either.
Things that are separate and then their
own special world, grid and Flex box.
Because remember I have a whole course
that's devoted to grid and Flex box, we
have a declaration on the parent, that's
where we display flex or display grid.
And the children of that parent have
very specific properties that go with it
that are not passed on after that.
So that's kind of unique in the world.
Either it inherits and and
inherits forever, or it doesn't inherit,
and that's that.
Those can be controlled,
we're gonna look at this as well.
There are properties and
values that can control inheritance and
we're gonna take a look at
that in detail momentarily.
The best place to go if you're
wondering if something inherits is MDN.
So if you go to MDN under their formal
definition which you'll find for
most properties in CSS,
you'll see this little table and
you just wanna look for
where it says inherited.
It's yes or its no.
And that will tell you whether
something is inherited or not.
Direct declarations are going
to win over inherited styles.
Now I'm gonna say this to you now and
you're gonna go.
Okay, that sounds great but as we're
gonna demonstrate here momentarily,
even if you have an incredibly
specific selector that is full of IDs,
it's full of classes.
It can still be beaten by
a single little type selector,
If those are not pointing to the actual
text that needs to be styled.
So we're going to go through
a big demo on that and
this is one of the most
confusing parts of CSS.
That is why that we need to think about
inheritance and specificity often together
and this is where I think the root of
a lot of confusion in CSS comes from.
Because people don't understand,
I'm throwing ideas at it,
I'm throwing bang important at it.
And my paragraph is still
not styling the way I want.
And so we're gonna re address that
particular issue here today as well.
So, let's start Coding then with
a demonstration of how inheritance works.